RFC: Dust Protection based on byte costs (#39)
iotaledger/protocol-rfcs: tips/TIP-0019/tip-0019.md

## Motivation

In a distributed ledger network, every participant, a so called node, needs to keep track of the current ledger state. Since `chrysalis-pt2`, the IOTA ledger state is based on the UTXO model, where every node keeps track of all the currently unspent outputs. Without a `dust protection`, even outputs containing only one single IOTA coin are valid and therefore stored in the database.

Misusage by honest users or intentionally bad behavior by malicious actors can lead to growing database and snapshot sizes and increasing computational costs (database lookups, balance calculations). Due to these increasing hardware requirements, the entry barrier to participate in the network becomes unaffordable and less nodes would operate the network.

Especially in a fee-less system like IOTA, this is a serious issue, since an attacker can create a lot of damage with low effort. Other DLTs do not face this problem yet today, because such an attack would be much more expensive due to the high transaction fees.

> 
> Solving the DLT scalability dilemma ultimatively leads to lower transaction costs. Therefore other DLT projects will also run into the same dust obstacle in the end. IOTA solves this problem with the `storage deposit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in order to solve scalability issues more and more transactions need to be handled. Therefore, other DLT projects will also eventually run into the same dust limitations. This document proposes to introduce `storage deposit` to address this.
```

### How does it affect other parts of the protocol?

The `dust protection` only affects "value-transactions", since blocks with a tagged data payload, formerly known as "data-transactions", are not stored in the ledger state and are therefore pruned after some time. Milestone payloads are also not affected. All output types like e.g. smart contract requests are affected by the `dust protection`, and must comply with the `min_deposit_of_output` criteria. Therefore these requests could get quite expensive for the user, but the same mechanism introduced for [Microtransactions on Layer 1](#Microtransactions-on-Layer-1) can be utilized for smart contract requests as well.

### Byte cost calculations

To limit the maximum database size, the total IOTA supply needs to be divided by the target database size in bytes to get the worst case scenario regarding the byte costs.

> Since this would be way too expensive and would not represent the real distribution of funds on the UTXOs, the zipf distribution fitting of the current ledger state could be utilized. Unfortunately these zipf fittings will not match the future distribution of the funds for several reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in this scenario no outputs hold more IOTA coins than required for the `dust protection`. This does not represent the real distribution of funds over the UTXOs. We could assume that these output amounts follow Zipf's law. Unfortunately, fitting a Zipf distribution to the current ledger state will not match the future distribution of the funds for several reasons:
```

| :information_source: Potential additional mechanisms for microtransactions are currently being discussed. |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

### Migration from old to new dust protection

All `SigLockedSingleOutput` below 1 MIOTA and `SigLockedDustAllowanceOutput` of an address could be collected and migrated to a single new `BasicOutput` with the smallest `Output ID` (byte-wise) of all these collected outputs as the new identifier.

This could probably be done in the form of a global snapshot and would represent a hard-fork.

Another solution is to convert all `SigLockedDustAllowanceOutput` into `BasicOutputs` and leave the `SigLockedSingleOutput` below 1 MIOTA untouched.

> ### Unresolved questions

Reviewer 2: We should remove this section as you said because any parameter values are subject to be put into a separate TIP or the actual network configuration anyway, so this is not the place to put it.

> ### Unresolved questions

Author: I will removed it :+1:

- With new use cases enabled by the new dust protection (e.g. tokenization, storing arbitrary data in the ledger), the distribution will dramatically change.
- Fittings for other DLT projects do not match because there are transaction fees in place, which decrease the amount of dust outputs in the distribution.

Another possibility would be to estimate how much percentage of the database will be used for outputs with minimum required deposit in the future. Since a fund sparsity percentage of more than 20% would already be bad for other upcoming protocol features like the mana calculation, we could take this value for our calculation instead of the worst case.

### Weights for different outputs

The different output types mentioned in the [Output Types Draft TIP-18](https://github.com/iotaledger/tips/pull/38) contain several mandatory and optional fields. Every field itself creates individual computational and storage requirements for the node, which is considered by having different weights for every field.

##### Field types

The following table describes different field types in an output:

<table>
    <tr>
        <th>Name</th>
        <th>Description</th>

>         <th>Weight</th>

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should specify that these can be floating point / fractional values. `vbyte_cost` on the other hand is of type integer, right? Maybe we should specify that somewhere too?
